+++
title = "#48in24 – Week 10: Allergies"
date = 2024-04-07T09:30:20+10:00
summary = "Achoo! Week 10's exercise is all about allergies, and I'll be looking at bit fields and metaprogramming to solve it. Featured languages: Nim, Elm, Rust, plus a bonus!"
tags = ["48in24"]
card_image = "/images/cards/48in24-week10.png"
+++

[Allergies](https://exercism.org/exercises/allergies) is a simpler task than last week's, based on the concept of [bit fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_field). In this task, any combination of allergies (from a given list) that a person might have is represented as a single integer score. The least significant bit of the integer represents one allergy (eggs, specifically), the next bit represents another (peanuts), and so on. Each bit that is set represents an allergy being present. Additional bits can be ignored.

The two functions in this exercise are (names differ between languages):

- `is_allergic_to`: given a score and one of the allergies from the list, return a Boolean indicating whether someone with that allergy score is allergic to the item.
- `allergies`: given an allergy score, return a list of all (known) allergies it represents.

My general strategy is to use bit shifts and the bitwise AND operator to implement `is_allergic_to`, then use that to implement `allergies` by checking each possible allergy. Where things get interesting is in how I deal with the enumerators themselves.

# Languages

## Elm

[Elm](https://elm-lang.org/) is an ML-like language specifically designed for building web applications. As a functional language inspired by ML, it uses immutable data structures, and everything revolves around writing functions to operate on that data.

The template from Exercism contains a definition of the `Allergy` type that we use:

```elm
module Allergies exposing (Allergy(..), isAllergicTo, toList)

type Allergy
    = Eggs
    | Peanuts
    | Shellfish
    | Strawberries
    | Tomatoes
    | Chocolate
    | Pollen
    | Cats
```

Unfortunately enums in Elm, unlike those in systems languages, do not have a numeric value (at least not one exposed to the user), so I had to create my own conversion function, as well as a list of all allergies for use in `toList` (the Elm verison of `allergies`):

```elm
allergyToBitmask : Allergy -> Int
allergyToBitmask allergy
    = case allergy of
        Eggs -> 1
        Peanuts -> 2
        Shellfish -> 4
        Strawberries -> 8
        Tomatoes -> 16
        Chocolate -> 32
        Pollen -> 64
        Cats -> 128

allergies : List Allergy
allergies =
    [ Eggs
    , Peanuts
    , Shellfish
    , Strawberries
    , Tomatoes
    , Chocolate
    , Pollen
    , Cats ]
```

You can see here that instead of converting allergies to their indices, I just converted them straight to the single-bit values that will be used later to check bits in `score`. This particular way of formatting lists, with commas at the start of each line, instead of at the end of the previous, is common in Elm, and it keeps items nicely aligned. Having to explicitly write out these tables is unfortunate, but I wasn't able to find much to do to clean this up. There's seemingly no built in way to get the index of an item in a list, and when I tried working with dictionaries, I found that it's impossible to make custom types `comparable`.

```elm
import Bitwise

isAllergicTo : Allergy -> Int -> Bool
isAllergicTo allergy score =
    Bitwise.and (allergyToBitmask allergy) score /= 0
```

Checking if an allergy is present is pretty straightforward. Elm has no bitwise operators, so the function `Bitwise.and` is used here instead, then I just check if the bit was set (the result was non-zero).

```elm
toList : Int -> List Allergy
toList score =
    List.filter (\allergy -> isAllergicTo allergy score) allergies
```

Creating the list of allergies for a score is pretty easy too, using `List.filter` and a lambda function.

Most of the code in the Elm version is just there to manage the `Allergy` type. The main function implementations are pretty nice, but I really wish there were better tools in Elm for dealing with custom types like this.

## Lua (Bonus!)

Moving on from Elm to another language that doesn't have enums with numeric values -- in fact, one that doesn't have enums at all -- we have [Lua](https://www.lua.org/). This one wasn't featured, but I'd already solved the exercise in the next language. Designed primarily as an embeddable scripting language (the text editor and the terminal I'm writing this post in are both configured with Lua), Lua is a pretty small and simple language. It's dynamically typed, only has a single type, the table, for representing more complex data, and intentionally keeps unnecessary features out of the language.

Lua has no enums, but thanks to its flexibility, I used this exercise as a chance to add a simple form of enums to Lua. The following function is my implementation of enums:

```lua
local function enum(...)
    local t = { all = {} }
    local all = t.all
    for i, name in ipairs { ... } do
        t[name] = i - 1
        all[#all+1] = name
    end
    return t
end
```

This won't cover every possible use of enums that you might ever want, but it does exactly what I need it to. I can use the `enum` function with as many string arguments as necessary to create a table that maps those strings to successive numbers, and provides a convenient way to iterate over them.

```lua
local Allergy = enum(
    "eggs",
    "peanuts",
    "shellfish",
    "strawberries",
    "tomatoes",
    "chocolate",
    "pollen",
    "cats"
)

local function allergic_to(score, which)
    return (score & (1 << Allergy[which])) ~= 0
end
```

Using this I make the enum, and `allergic_to` is pretty easy to write. Indexing the `Allergy` table converts strings to the corresponsing value, then the logic is the same as usual.

For the final part, `list`, I wanted to use the same higher-order functions that I'm used to in other languages, so I wrote a quick version of `filter` to use:

```lua
local function filter(l, f)
    local r = {}
    for _, v in ipairs(l) do
        if f(v) then
            r[#r+1] = v
        end
    end
    return r
end

local function list(score)
    return filter(Allergy.all, function(a) return allergic_to(score, a) end)
end
```

It just iterates over each item, calls a function, and if the function returns `true` (or anything other than `false` and `nil`), adds it the the output table. Implementing `list` is then basically the same as in Elm, with slightly different syntax.

While this isn't true metaprogramming as someone coming from Lisp might be used to, where you can treat code as data, I find that Lua's simple design plus powerful table structure means that treating data as data might be enough.

# Rust

🦀🦀🦀🦀 [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) time! 🦀🦀🦀🦀 I'm a huge fan of Rust, and I've been waiting for it to make an appearance here. While I'm yet to find a "perfect" programming language, Rust falls solidly into the "pretty excellent" category. It's a general purpose programming language, and is particularly popular for systems programming, but has found applications just about everywhere. Writing this blog post, I use at least three tools that are built at least partially with Rust -- my terminal emulator, the SVG rasteriser that makes the OpenGraph cards, and Firefox (yep, several components in Firefox are Rusty!) -- and I feel like that number will probably increase over time.

For this exercise, I get to show off one really neat feature of Rust. I mentioned my Lua solution didn't involve true metaprogramming, but this one certainly does! I've pulled in the `enum-iterator` crate, which allows me to automatically generate the code to iterate through all of the allergies.

```rust
use enum_iterator::{all, Sequence};

pub struct Allergies(u32);

#[derive(Debug, PartialEq, Clone, Copy, Sequence)]
pub enum Allergen {
    Eggs,
    Peanuts,
    Shellfish,
    Strawberries,
    Tomatoes,
    Chocolate,
    Pollen,
    Cats,
}
```

These are the types that get used for this exercise. `Allergies` is a simple wrapper type that allows the type system to ensure we only use values of this type in the expected places -- this sort of thing helps avoid confusion when using the same primitive types for multiple specialised purposes, and gives you the option of adding helper functions to these primitive types. `Allergen` is a plain enum with several traits (pretty much like interfaces in many OOP languages) automatically implemented by `derive`. `derive` uses procedural macros to generate code at compile time, cutting down on the amount of boilerplate you need to write.

The first two, `Debug` and `PartialEq` are required for Exercism's tests, so I won't go into details on those here. `Clone` and `Copy` allow me to make copies of the data as needed -- `Clone` adds the `clone` method to values, to explicitly clone them, and `Copy` (which requires `Clone` to be implemented first) allows values of this type to be implicitly copied by just copying the raw bits, which works well for simple and small types.

Those four derive macros are provided by the Rust standard library, but the next one comes from the external crate. `Sequence` is the derive macro I mentioned that allows me to easily iterate over enum values without writing the boilerplate code myself!

The actual functions here get implemented as methods on `Allergies` inside an `impl Allergies` block. The internals of `Allergies` are not public, so the first thing to write is a `new` function to create `Allergies` values, which is very simple, since it's just a wrapper type:

```rust
pub fn new(score: u32) -> Self {
    Self(score)
}
```

The `is_allergic_to` function is basically the same as I've shown so far, except that getting the numeric value of an enum is as simple as casting it to a number with `as u32`.

```rust
pub fn is_allergic_to(&self, allergen: &Allergen) -> bool {
    self.0 & (1 << *allergen as u32) != 0
}
```

{{< aside "Borrowing" >}}
When learning Rust, programmers often struggle with the borrow checker, and I think the way this exercise was designed in Rust might make things worse for newcomers. I feel that `allergen` here should have been passed in as an owned value (`allergen: Allergen`), because otherwise converting it to `u32` becomes harder. An `&Allergen` cannot be directly cast to an integer, only an `Allergen` can. To make matters worse, dereferencing it with `*allergen` causes errors that could be a little confusing to someone just learning Rust, even though it does hint at the solution.

The solution, by the way, is to add `Clone` and `Copy` to the derive attribute -- that's why I have them there. Then, you can dereference fine, because making a copy of the `Allergen` is cheap.
{{< /aside >}}

Finally, the implementation of `allergies` is a one-liner, thanks to the `enum-iterator` crate:

```rust
pub fn allergies(&self) -> Vec<Allergen> {
    all::<Allergen>().filter(|a| self.is_allergic_to(a)).collect()
}
```

I just use `all` from that crate to get an iterator over the enum values, `filter` it down like the other solutions, and `collect` into a `Vec`, since iterators are a lazy type that need to be consumed like this to get an actual list.

The Rust standard library doesn't always have everything you need, but there's a good chance that a third party crate will, and Exercism supports [a lot](https://github.com/exercism/rust-test-runner/blob/main/local-registry/Cargo.toml) of useful crates.

## Nim

[Nim](https://nim-lang.org/) is a language I introduced back in week 2, but to recap: modern language, Pythonic syntax, compiles to C, excellent standard library. I saved Nim for last because it has a really beautiful trick that makes this exercise incredibly easy!

[Sets](https://nim-lang.org/docs/manual.html#types-set-type) are supported not as a standard library collection, but as a language feature in Nim, and they are stored as bit fields. (There is also a more typical hash set in the standard library.) Our allergy score is a bit field -- maybe you see where I'm going with this? The track maintainers realised this, and used a set as the return type for `allergies`, leaving very little work for me to do.

Step 1: Define the enum. (`*` means export.)

```nim
type
  Allergen* = enum
    Eggs, Peanuts, Shellfish, Strawberries, Tomatoes, Chocolate, Pollen, Cats
```

Step 2: Cast.

```nim
proc allergies*(score: int): set[Allergen] =
  cast[set[Allergen]](score)
```

Step 3: Use `allergies` to implement `isAllergicTo`:

```nim
proc isAllergicTo*(score: int, allergen: Allergen): bool =
  allergen in allergies(score)
```

That's it. The allergy score *is* a Nim set, I just have to cast it to one, then I can use that to check single elements with efficient bit field operations.

This bit field `set` type would be really handy for interacting with C APIs that use bit fields to specify a set of flags, and I imagine that's part of why it was created. Nim has once again impressed me, but once again I doubt I'll use it for too much outside of Exercism.

# Final Thoughts

I'm glad I finally got a chance to use Rust in #48in24, and I think that it worked quite well for this task! I had decided not to pull in Rust as a bonus language, because it would have taken away a chance to try other languages, but if I find another task where it would work well, I might show it off again.

Thanks for reading, hopefully you learned something new!
